Laliston Inn and St David's Church
The church in the centre of the village is St David's Church.
It's a grade 1 listed building and parts of the church date back to the 13th and 14th
centuries.
There was known to be a church in Laliston long before the Normans came to Glamorgan
in 1093, but it is likely to have been built from mud and wood so there are no remains.
The church was rebuilt in stone by 1106 when the Norman Lord of Glamorgan, Robert Fitzhammon,
journeyed from Margand to Tewkesbury passing the chapel of Lalistuna along the way.
The village of Laliston is said to have grown around the church.
The church was destroyed in 1226 when locals attacked and burnt several religious houses
in the area.
This was in protest against the Normans who had control over the abbeys and churches and
seized land and property from the local Welsh people.
It was built again, this time with a large fortified tower as a defensive strong point.
At the beginning of the 15th century, Oang Lindoor and his followers overran Glamorgan.
Though he usually respected churches, it's possible that the church tower was used against
him and that he was forced to retaliate.
The church suffered again.
In the 15th century the church was rebuilt again.
It was said to have been entirely rebuilt from the stones of the ruined St. Carwith
Church in Llangaewydd, though this is unlikely to be true as a peculiar mixture of stones
was used in its construction.
Instead, many of the stones from St. Carwith are thought to have been used in the walls
and houses around Llangaewydd.
A few stones remain in the field, known as Caer Hain Egluys, which translates as the
old church field.
These are said to mark the position of the vanished church.
Restorations took place in 1871 and in 1958 when urgent repairs were made to the roof.
Half an altar stone was discovered at this time, hidden beneath the arch in St. David's.
It is thought to be from the old church in Llangaewydd and is therefore over 800 years old.
The Tower of St. David's Church has four bells, two of which are pre-Reformation periods, 1535.
The others have inscriptions dating back to 1647 and 1719.
Laliston Inn is situated on Wind Street.
It once consisted of two cottages, one built in 1492 and the other in 1547.
In earlier times it was named Laliston Country Club, due to the licensing laws.
Further information about these quaint old houses and their joining together to make
Laliston Inn is not available at present.